feat(dsm): DSMON-894 Add Messages documentation for Data Streams Monitoring (#30389)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/data_streams/messages.md

---
title: Messages
---

> The Messages feature allows you to view messages at specific offsets within Kafka. Inspecting these messages can be crucial when troubleshooting issues related to specific services or data streams.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the Messages feature to view Kafka messages directly and troubleshoot your data streams efficiently. You can view messages at specific offsets within Kafka. Inspecting these messages can be crucial when troubleshooting issues related to specific services or data streams.
```

## Setup
Before diving into detailed configuration steps, here's a quick overview of what's involved in setting up the Messages feature:

> | Step               | Description                                                                                                                                       | Setup Guides              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Step               | Description                                                                                                                                       | Setup Guide              |
```

|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Agent setup        | An agent needs Kafka consumer integration enabled, be on at least version 7.69.0, and have remote configuration enabled                           | [Agent Setup][1]          |

> | Verify permissions | You'll need a few log access permissions which usually come standard as well as `Data Streams Monitoring Capture Messages` enabled in Datadog     | [Required Permissions][2] |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Verify permissions | You need a few log access permissions, which usually come standard as well as `Data Streams Monitoring Capture Messages` enabled in Datadog     | [Required Permissions][2] |
```

> ### Agent Setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Agent setup
```

> #### Selecting an Agent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Selecting an agent
```

Any Datadog agent having access to Kafka can be used for setup.

> If you self-host Kafka, we recommend setting up Messages on your one of your Kafka brokers' agents. Otherwise, choose any one agent your producer or consumer services communicate with that has access to your Kafka cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you self-host Kafka, Datadog recommends setting up Messages on one of your Kafka brokers' agents. Otherwise, choose any one agent your producer or consumer services communicate with that has access to your Kafka cluster.
```

#### Step-by-step guide

Complete the following steps on the same Datadog agent:

##### 1. Verify agent version

> Ensure your agent is running version `7.69.0` or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure your agent is running version `7.69.0` or later.

To check your agent version, run `datadog-agent version` on your host.
```

##### 2. Enable [remote configuration][3]

> Confirm Remote Configuration is enabled for your agent (typically enabled by default). Verify this setting on the [Fleet Automation page][4] and also confirm it at the organizational level via the [Remote Configuration settings page][5].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Confirm that Remote Configuration is enabled for your agent (it is typically enabled by default). Verify this setting on the [Fleet Automation page][4] and also confirm it at the organizational level from the [Remote Configuration settings page][5].
```

##### 3. Configure Kafka consumer integration

Follow the steps detailed at [Kafka consumer integration documentation][6] to configure a Datadog agent for the Kafka consumer integration.

##### 4. Verify setup

* Review agent logs for `kafka_consumer` entries to confirm successful configuration.
* Verify data ingestion by inspecting the `kafka.broker_offset` metric in Datadog's Metrics Explorer, filtering by the relevant Kafka topics.

### Required permissions

You must have the following permissions enabled:

* `Data Streams Monitoring Capture Messages`
* `Logs Read Index Data`
* `Logs Read Data`
* `Logs Live Tail`

You can verify your current permissions on your [Profile page][7].

To enable permissions, edit an existing role or create a new one on the [Roles page][8]. If you don't have adequate access to modify roles, contact your organization's administrator.

[1]: #agent-setup
[2]: #required-permissions
[3]: /agent/remote_config
[4]: https://app.datadoghq.com/fleet
[5]: https://app.datadoghq.com/organization-settings/remote-config
[6]: /integrations/kafka-consumer/?tab=host#setup

> [7]: https://app.datad0g.com/personal-settings/profile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[7]: https://app.datadoghq.com/personal-settings/profile
```

---
title: Messages
---

Use the Messages feature to view Kafka messages directly and troubleshoot your data streams efficiently. You can view messages at specific offsets within Kafka. Inspecting these messages can be crucial when troubleshooting issues related to specific services or data streams.

## Setup

> Before diving into detailed configuration steps, here's a quick overview of what's involved in setting up the Messages feature:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before diving into detailed configuration steps, here's an overview of what's involved in setting up the Messages feature:
```

---
title: Messages
---

The Messages feature allows you to view messages at specific offsets within Kafka. Inspecting these messages can be crucial when troubleshooting issues related to specific services or data streams.

## Setup
Before diving into detailed configuration steps, here's a quick overview of what's involved in setting up the Messages feature:

| Step               | Description                                                                                                                                       | Setup Guides              |
|--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Agent setup        | An agent needs Kafka consumer integration enabled, be on at least version 7.69.0, and have remote configuration enabled                           | [Agent Setup][1]          |

> | Verify permissions | You'll need a few log access permissions which usually come standard as well as `Data Streams Monitoring Capture Messages` enabled in Datadog     | [Required Permissions][2] |

Reviewer 2: can we list the permissions needed or don't talk about the log permissions?

Author: The `Required Permissions` link takes them to the bottom section listing out the permissions: https://docs-staging.datadoghq.com/steven.pham/dsm/steven.pham/dsm-live-messages-v2/data_streams/messages/#required-permissions

<img width="1657" height="1765" alt="Screenshot 2025-07-14 at 10 01 44 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/df75fb15-972d-4181-ab95-2e01c5f5332a" />

### Agent Setup

#### Selecting an Agent
Any Datadog agent having access to Kafka can be used for setup.

> If you self-host Kafka, set up Messages on your Kafka broker's agent. Otherwise, choose any agent your producer or consumer services communicate with that has access to your Kafka cluster.

Reviewer 2: set up `the kafka consumer check` on your Kafka broker's agent.

Also, there can be many brokers, I don't know what to recommend in this case 🤔 
Maybe we should say: `on your Kafka brokers agents` but then, it doesn't explain how to configure each one differently.

#### Step-by-step guide

Complete the following steps on the same Datadog agent:

##### 1. Verify agent version

Ensure your agent is running version `7.69.0` or later.

##### 2. Enable [remote configuration][3]

Confirm Remote Configuration is enabled for your agent (typically enabled by default). Verify this setting on the [Fleet Automation page][4] and also confirm it at the organizational level via the [Remote Configuration settings page][5].

##### 3. Configure Kafka consumer integration
Create or update the Kafka consumer configuration file at

```

> [agent config directory]/kafka_consumer.d/conf.yaml

Reviewer 2: What do you think about updating the docs of the `kafka_consumer` integration, with this text, and linking to it from this doc?

```

Here's an example configuration (see a detailed sample [here][9]):
```yaml
init_config:

instances:
  - kafka_connect_str: kafka:29092 # Replace with your Kafka cluster address
    monitor_unlisted_consumer_groups: true
    tags:

>       - env:staging

Reviewer 2: The metrics inherit automatically any host tags of the host the agent is running on. This will include environment most of the time if the setup of Datadog is done well.

Ideally, we would not use `env` when filtering the Kafka lag metric, but use `kafka_cluster_id` instead.

Author: Ohh good to know. I'll modify the wording that the tags are inherited

We don't use `env` in the remote config but we might need it in DSM when filtering for broker offset metric when users are filtering on a datacenter or some other primary tag

Reviewer 2: If we know the kafka_cluster_id of the topic side panel, we could filter on the broker offset metric using only kafka_cluster_id instead of using `env` or primary tags. It would be more reliable since the `kafka_cluster_id` is automatically added.
